Question Switch and Readme (#9752)
dotnet/msbuild: documentation/specs/question.md

# Question the build (Is Up-To-Date?)

MSBuild can skip Target or Task from running again by implementing some checks. Targets uses the Inputs and Outputs parameters to compare the timestamp of input and output files. Tasks have different behavior and thus have different rules. See below for details of each task shipped with MSBuild. Custom tasks can implement `IIncrementalTask` interface.

Question switch ask if the next build is up-to-date. It will start a build but will error out as soon as a target or task is not up-to-date. This error stops the build and allows investigation at the point of failure. Recommend to use binlog logging to gather all the information. Targets or task that don't have an up-to-date check will build normally. 

> Fast Up-To-Date is a system that is implemented by a IDE that decides if it needs to run MSBuild.  MSBuild takes a non-trival amount of time to load, evaluate, and run through each target and task.  Fast Up-To-Date is faster, but can be less accurate, suitable for an IDE and a human interface.  It is not accurate enough for CI.

Author: I think I want to remove it.  I doesn't fit in this context.

## Usage
Question mode is designed to be used on the command line.  Run your normal build, then run again with /question.
```
msbuild /p:Configuration=Debug Project1.csproj /bl:build.binlog
msbuild /p:Configuration=Debug Project1.csproj /bl:incremental.binlog /question
```
If there are no errors, then your build is up-to-date.
If there are errors, then investigate the error.  See common errors below.  Keep both logs to help with your investigation.

## Custom Tasks

> Task author can implement the optional `IIncrementalTask` interface that will explose `FailIfNotIncremental`. `FailIfNotIncremental` is true when /question switch is used. The custom task will need to decide how it want to handle their behavior.  For example.  If there is already a message describing why the task cannot be skipped, then simply convert the message to a error. Remember to return false to stop the build.  For the best reproducibility, do not modify any files on disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Task author can implement the optional `IIncrementalTask` interface that will expose `FailIfNotIncremental`. `FailIfNotIncremental` is true when /question switch is used. The custom task will need to decide how it want to handle their behavior.  For example.  If there is already a message describing why the task cannot be skipped, then simply convert the message to a error. Remember to return false to stop the build.  For the best reproducibility, do not modify any files on disk.
```

```C#
if (FailIfNotIncremental)
{
  TaskLoggingHelper.LogErrorWithCodeFromResources("ToolTask.NotUpToDate");
  return false;
}
else
{
  TaskLoggingHelper.LogMessageWithCodeFromResources("ToolTask.NotUpToDate");
}
```

## Shipping Tasks
When question switch is used, it will modify the shipping task with these behavior.  Note: this is still experimental and can change.

`Exec`

> Doesn't have a up-to-date check.  It will always run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Doesn't have an up-to-date check.  It will always run.
```

`ToolTask`

> Error when inherited ToolTask overrides `SkipTaskExecution()` and returns false.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Errors out when inherited ToolTask overrides `SkipTaskExecution()` and returns `false`.
```

`Touch`

> Warn when a file touched.  It is unclear if the file touched will participate in the build as it is a common practice to touch a file to signal external tool to run.  Use Target Inputs and Outputs to skip this task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Warns when a file is touched.  It is unclear if the file touched will participate in the build as it is a common practice to touch a file to signal external tool to run.  Use Target Inputs and Outputs to skip this task.
```

`Copy`

> Error when any copy action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Errors out when any copy action occurs.
```

msbuild /p:Configuration=Debug Project1.csproj /bl:incremental.binlog /question
```
If there are no errors, then your build is up-to-date.  
If there are errors, then investigate the error.  See common errors below.  Keep both logs to help with your investigation.

## Custom Tasks
Task author can implement the optional `IIncrementalTask` interface that will explose `FailIfNotIncremental`. `FailIfNotIncremental` is true when `/question` switch is used. The custom task will need to decide how it want to handle its behavior.  For example - if there is already a message describing why the task cannot be skipped, then simply convert the message to an error. Remember to return `false` to stop the build.  For the best reproducibility, try to preserve the input state and exit early.

```C#
if (FailIfNotIncremental)
{
  TaskLoggingHelper.LogErrorWithCodeFromResources("ToolTask.NotUpToDate");
  return false;
}
else
{
  TaskLoggingHelper.LogMessageWithCodeFromResources("ToolTask.NotUpToDate");
}
```

### `ToolTask`
If inheriting from ToolTask, your custom task can override `SkipTaskExecution()`.  When it returns `false`, TookTask will exit with error.

## Shipping Tasks

> When `/question` switch is used, it will modify the shipping task with these behavior.  Note: this is still experimental and can change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `/question` switch is used, it will modify the shipping task behavior as follows.  Note: this is still experimental and can change.
```

`Copy`
Errors out when any copy action occurs.

`WriteLinesToFile`
Error when WriteOnlyWhenDifferent is true.  This task could be used to append to a log file that isn't participating in the build itself.

`Delete`
Warn that a file still exists and is to be deleted.  It is unclear if the file is part of the build or it is deleting an accessary file outside of the build.

`Move`
No warning or errors.  This task is effectively a no-op as files could not exist anymore.

`DownloadFile`
Error if SkipUnchangedFiles is true.

`GenerateResource` 
Error if any files would be generated.

`MakeDir`
Error if folder doesn't exist.

`RemoveDir`
Error if folder still exist.

`Unzip`
Error if SkipUnchangedFiles is true.

`ZipDirectory`
Error if the destination zip file doesn't exists.

## Common Up-To-Date Error
- **Typographical error**. Spelling or incorrect path.  Check if the target inputs and outputs real files.
- **Casing**. While MSBuild on Windows is case insenstive, some command line comparision and hashing tool are case senstive.  Paths and Project Refernces are a common source of casing issues.

> - **Cross Product**. Inputs and Outputs are sometimes used for Cross Product. Try to move all to `Outputs` parameter or `Returns` parameter instead of Inputs.

Reviewer 2: What is a 'Cross Product'?
Does this need an explanation or link? I'm not able to understand this one due to that lack of knowledge.

- **Exec Task** are not Skipable, thus they should be wrapped with Target Inputs and Outputs or other systems.  For backwards compatibility, Question will not issue an error.
- **FileWritten**.  The common clean system will remove files that aren't in the FileWritten itemgroup.  Sometimes task output won't be add to FileWritten itemgroup.

> - **Build, Build, Build**.  Sometimes, a 2nd build will expose up to date issue.  Verify building 3 times. For example, 1st Build, Question 2nd build, Run 2nd Build, and Question 3rd build.

Reviewer 2: The numbers are confusing here - should it be ``Build 3 times, after each run, run the build with `/question` switch` to reveal possible incrementality issues.`` ?

> - **Double Checks**.  Since target and task could be incremental, if both are implemented, then it can lead task skipping but not the task.  For example, a Target has inputs A and outputs B.  If A is newer, than B, then the target will start.  If the task compares the content of A and B and deems nothing has changed, then B is not updated.  If such case, this leads to target rerunning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Double Checks**.  Since target and task could be incremental, if both employ incrementality checks, then it can lead to skipping the task but not the calling target.  For example, a Target has inputs A and outputs B.  If A is newer, than B, then the target will start.  If the task called by that target compares the content of A and B and deems nothing has changed, then B is not updated.  In such case, it will lead to the target rerunning.
```

Btw. is there any advice to this case, how to avoid the situation? E.g. - would it ba advicable to use a temprary file with hash of the real input as the input to the target?

Author: It will differ case by case, but in general, to consolidate the checks into a single location and remove the other.  The author would need to decide what is the best course of action.
